Source: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/hpd/services-and-information/tenants-rights-and-responsibilities.page
Accessed: 2026-06-08
Description: NYC HPD tenant rights and responsibilities: repairs, heat, harassment, eviction protections
---
Tenant Rights and Responsibilities - HPD Housing Preservation & Development 311 Search all NYC.gov websites Menu Text-Size Search Tenants' Rights Tenants' Rights and Responsibilities Share Print Tenants' Rights and Responsibilities In New York City, tenants have many rights relating to the safety and quality of their housing. Tenants should expect to live in safe, well-maintained buildings that are free from vermin, leaks, and hazardous conditions. Laws protect tenants from harassment and discrimination. Tenants have responsibilities to their building owners and other tenants - including not damaging the building, and responding to annual owner inquiries related to window guards, lead-based paint, and to maintain smoke and carbon monoxide detectors. For more information on tenants’ rights, please see the Tenant Bill of Rights . Free legal advice and counsel is available for New York City residential renters. To access these services, please call 311 and ask for the "Tenant Helpline", visit the Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants webpage, or visit the Contact Us form. New Tenant Protection Laws Changes to New York State rent laws, recently passed by lawmakers in Albany, make it harder for landlords to evict any tenant. In addition, the new rent laws strengthened protections for New Yorkers living in rent-controlled or rent-stabilized apartments. These laws are enforced by the New York State Division of Housing and Community Renewal (DHCR). DHCR is the State's affordable housing agency, with a mission to build, preserve, and protect affordable housing and increase home ownership throughout New York State. As of June 14, 2019, there are new laws protecting tenants in New York State. The new rent laws are permanent unless the legislature amends, repeals, or terminates them. Learn more about the new tenant protection laws from the Mayor's Office to Protect Tenants . Good Cause Eviction Good Cause Eviction is a New York State law that went into effect on April 20, 2024. It gives some tenants of unregulated (also known as “market rate”) homes in New York City new protections. Landlords of homes covered by the new Good Cause Eviction requirements cannot end a tenancy without a “good cause” reason and tenants can use this law as a defense in Housing Court. Tenants can also use the law to challenge rent increases above a certain level if they are evicted for nonpayment of rent. The law applies to eviction cases started on or after April 20, 2024, meaning cases where the landlord first filed documents in court to begin the case on or after this date. Read more about Good Cause Eviction here . The ABCs of Housing The ABCs of Housing is HPD's guide to housing rules and regulations for owners and tenants. Owners and tenants have legal responsibilities to each other. HPD is one of many city and state agencies that enforce those responsibilities. This booklet is designed to help owners and tenants gain an understanding of the rules and regulations affecting housing, and to provide information about how to receive assistance. Inside the guide you will find information about owners' and tenants' rights and responsibilities, staying in your apartment safely, resources for new affordable housing or rental assistance, and useful contact information for other housing related issues. Immigrant Rights in Housing Immigrant New Yorkers have the same rights and responsibilities in housing as all other tenants, regardless of documentation status. Landlords cannot treat tenants differently because of their immigration or citizenship status or national origin, including by refusing to do repairs or refusing to sell, rent, or lease housing on different terms. Threatening to call ICE, using the term “illegal alien”, retaliating for making complaints or organizing, or otherwise intimidating tenants because of their immigration or citizenship status or national origin is illegal and constitutes harassment. If you believe you have been discriminated against because of your immigration or citizenship status or national origin, or membership in another protected class, please contact the NYC Commission on Human Rights (CCHR) at (212) 416-0127 to report discrimination. For more information see our flyer on this topic (translated into 10 other languages) below. For more information on your rights when dealing with ICE, see the following guide from the Mayor’s Office of Immigrant Affairs (MOIA): Know Your Rights: Federal Immigration Enforcement (ICE) - MOIA . Watch: How to Identify an HPD Inspector . For more information, see our Immigrant Rights in Housing Flyer Arabic / العربية Bengali / বাংলা Chinese (Simplified) / 简化字 French / français Haitian-Creole / Kreyòl ayisyen Korean / 한국어 Polish / polski Russian / Русский язык Spanish / Español Urdu / اردو Tenants' Rights FAQs Expand All Collapse All Click a topic, or press the enter key on a topic, to reveal its answer. What are my responsibilities as a tenant? Tenants must comply with the provisions of the law and are responsible for violations caused by willful acts, gross negligence, and abuse. These as well as unreasonable refusal to allow access to the apartment by the owner or his or her agent or employee for the purpose of making repairs or improvements required by the Housing Maintenance Code and Multiple Dwelling Law may constitute grounds for eviction proceedings. Tenants are also responsible to respond to owners on legally required notices, including the notice regarding lead-based paint and window guards. What are the responsibilities of my landlord? Owners must ensure that buildings are safe, clean and well maintained, in both common areas and in individual apartments. Among other responsibilities, owners must provide and maintain security measures, heat, hot and cold water, and good lighting. Owners must register the property annually with HPD, if the building is rent-stabilized the owner must registered rents annually with the New York State Homes and Community Renewa